Uncontrolled forms.
Not just from when you feel out of control of your life,
we're gonna talk about some uncontrolled forms.
I alluded to it a little bit on this create order page
that we have controlled inputs here, right?
That we're actually explicitly using the value
and we're setting it,
and we're using hooks to track everything.
As you might imagine, that's called a controlled form
because we're using React to explicitly control the input
and the output of the form.
I will say that this is more unusual.
I would say usually you wanna do
what's called an uncontrolled form,
which is basically like let the form,
let the browser just handle all of the form stuff for you
and only listen for submit events.
This is pretty easy for us
to just kind of knock out really quick,
so let's go ahead and go do that.
I'm also wanted to show you how to do a post
or a mutation with 10-stack query,
so we'll knock out both of those birds with one stone.
Okay, so inside of your API directory,
we're gonna make a gets pass orders.
No, I'm just kidding.
We're gonna make a post contact file here,
and it's gonna be export default
async function post contact.
Takes in name, email, and message.
And contact response equals await fetch.
And we're gonna post to slash API slash contact.
And we have to give it some more configuration here,
so we have to give it a method,
which is going to be post headers.
As we learned before, definitely S headers.
We're doing content type, application slash JSON,
and the body is going to be JSON.stringify,
name, email, and message.
So if this is not apparent yet,
we're gonna make a contact form, right,
where someone can go in and put name, email,
and message, and then we will spam them with emails.
It's kind of my plan here in Brian's Capitalism 101.
So if the response is not okay,
then we'll just throw an error.
This is how you wanna handle this, actually,
because that way TanStack query
will actually catch the error for you,
and then it'll set the isError property to be true,
and then you can handle that appropriately, right?
And then return response.json.
So this is an async function,
so it always returns a promise.
I think we talked about that earlier,
that async functions always return.
So what we could have done here is it said like,
const JSON equals response.json and return JSON.
That's typically what I've done,
but I got this code from TanStack query,
and they do it this way.
And it's because if you return a promise,
then it does something called promise chaining
that none of you ever have to think
about that term ever again,
but that's what it is called,
where you basically do like promise,
then this, then this, then this, then this,
and so if you return a promise,
it implicitly chains that promise to the current promise.
Not that that really matters for you,
but that's why it's okay that we're not awaiting here,
because you could do it to return await response.json,
but you don't need to,
and it doesn't really make a difference.
Again, stuff you just don't really have to care about.
Okay, so let's go to index.lazy.jsx.
I feel like most of the stuff I learn from stuff like this
is like, I'll look at a lot of lines,
and I'll be like, why the hell does that work that way?
And then I'll get like way too deep into it.
That's how I found that one.
Okay, index.lazy.jsx.
We're gonna make a contact form,
so we'll just make another one of these li's
with a link into it.
This is gonna go to contact,
and we're gonna put it like a contact us
or something like that.
Okay, and then we're gonna go make a new route here.
So this is gonna be contact.lazy.jsx.
Get a nice little stub here from 10-stack router.
So that's all good.
We need import,
use,
and then we're gonna make a new route here.
Import,
use mutation
from 10-stack React query,
and we need our postcontact from postcontact.
There we go.
And then we're gonna make a function called
contact route or page or whatever you wanna call it.
And we'll just put that up here.
Okay, now we have our React component.
So now we're gonna do a mutation,
which is just a fun way of saying a post
or a put or a patch or something like that,
but it's changing something.
A query is, in theory, you can call the query
as many times as you want.
It doesn't change anything, right?
It's just getting data back from the API.
And a mutation, you don't wanna call that
like a bunch of different times
because it could be semantically different
depending on if you do it multiple times, right?
I don't wanna get into the intricacies of REST
because, again, it is one of the dumbest things
that people argue about.
It's like, should this be a put or should this be a patch
or should this be a post?
And my answer to that is it doesn't matter,
just write the API, right?
Who cares?
So 10-stack kind of wraps all these things
into the put, patch, delete,
all that kind of stuff into a mutation, right?
It's something that's changing on the server side.
So const mutation equals use mutation.
Here a mutation function, function ee.preventDefault, right?
Because we're gonna use this as a form submit.
So we'll have a preventDefault.
We're gonna grab the form data.
So we're gonna say that by const form data
equals new form data.
Form data is a browser API.
So this comes from the browser, doesn't come from React.
And we're gonna say ee.target.
ee.target in this particular case,
because this is gonna be a submit event from a form,
ee.target will be what?
The form, right?
So the form element will actually be the ee.target here.
So when you do new form data like this,
it's going to then pull all this out
into this form data object.
And we can now pull all of the information out of the form
using this form data API.
Okay, and then we're gonna return post contact,
form data.getName.
And we're gonna do that three times,
once for email and once for message.
Just to make sure we got this right,
we're gonna look in post contact is name,
name, email, message.
Get rid of that, don't save.
And to look again in contact, name, email, message, right?
It's gotta make sure that the things get put in there
in the right order.
Now we have this mutation function or a hook
that we can call.
I don't wanna call that a hook,
but it's like the result of a hook.
This would be an object of some variety.
What do they call it?
It's a use mutation result is the name of the type.
And now this doesn't get called every time
like query does, right?
It actually waits for you to invoke it.
So let's go check out how you do that.
Let's go start building our markup for the page.
We're gonna say return here
and we'll start building our contact page.
Okay, H2, this is a contact.
And then we're gonna say if the mutation is successful,
so if they successfully click submit my contact,
we don't wanna just leave them on the contact page,
we wanna do something else, right?
So we're gonna say is success.
And if it is successful, then we're gonna say H3 submitted.
In theory, you would have probably some nicer thing here
would be like redirect them back to the homepage
or something like that.
But I don't know, let them do some work, let them earn it.
Okay, so otherwise, if we're gonna show them the form
of something that they can submit.
So the form and then we're gonna say on submit,
we're gonna say mutation dot,
you're never gonna guess what the function's called.
Mute, mutate.
So whenever the submit happens, right?
Either by someone hitting enter
or hitting the submit button,
it's going to call this function,
which as you guessed is probably gonna go call
the mutation function on this use mutation hook, right?
But not before then, which is cool.
All right, we're gonna put a couple inputs in here.
Name equals name.
We're gonna have one for placeholder equals name.
And we'll have another one here for email.
Email and it's good idea as well to put type equals email.
That'll bring up the different keyboard
in iOS and Android, right?
And it also do some basic validations
like is this a valid email?
Yeah.
Why is it for us calling a mutation dot mutate?
Why does that automatically go to mutate dot function
and not us calling mutate dot mutate function?
It's a good question.
So this is not directly calling the use mutation function
here, it's actually calling something else
inside of TanStack query,
which is doing a bunch of other stuff first
and then it calls your function.
Yeah.
So this is just saying like,
hey, whenever you're ready, call this function.
This is the function that I've made
to actually call the API.
But there's some other machinery
that it has to take care of first.
That makes sense?
Cool.
Good question.
Okay, so that's the inputs that we're on.
So email, email, email.
The placeholder, we should probably make these capital
because we're not savages.
All right.
And then we'll have a text area underneath this.
Placeholder equals message
and name equals message
and that's good for that.
And then we just want a button at the end of this
that says submit button, submit.
If you really want to get explicit here,
you can say type equals submit,
but you don't need to,
that's implicit on buttons, right?
But that's up to you.
And cool.
All right.
I think this is pretty close to good to go.
We'll just refresh the page here.
We'll go to Padre Gino's, contact us.
Nice looking little contact form we've built out here.
So we're gonna put Brian.
We'll put Brian at example.com.
And why do you have snake?
Fish, pizza.
This is disturbing.
This is probably from the FBI.
So we should be able to submit this now, submitted.
And if we go look at your, you can see right there.
This is now being logged in our API server.
And like all customer contact forms,
it just gets logged and then ignored.
But the point being here is one,
we did the mutation with 10 stack query,
which is pretty cool.
And we also did uncontrolled forms,
which I'm gonna say there's no reason
that we would need to necessarily like
keep track of everything in a hook here, right?
Cause we're not doing anything
that's kind of reactive to that.
We're not doing like any sort of like type ahead or like
in the previous course, I did one with like pet adoption.
So you would set like the cat to be the type of animal.
And then you'd have to repopulate the breed list.
So it's reactive to what's happening in the first dropdown.
Also known as the double dropdown problem.
That one you have to do a controlled form
because you have to react to the first one, right?
You have to repopulate the breed dropdown list
based on what's in the first dropdown.
But this one, you're just gathering all the form data
and you're submitting it somewhere.
Uncontrolled form is how you wanna do that.